TOPIC: Panfletos y hojas de datos
TITLE: Brochures and Fact Sheets in English
SOURCE_URL: https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/brochures-and-fact-sheets-in-english
----------------------------------------

This fact sheet presents five steps for helping someone having thoughts of suicide: Ask, Be There, Help Keep Them Safe, Help Them Connect, and Follow Up.

Information about attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in adults including symptoms, diagnosis, treatment options, and resources to find help.

Information about symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, and resources for children, teens, and adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).

Describes autism spectrum disorder (ASD): signs and symptoms; causes and risk factors; diagnosis in children, teens, and adults; and treatments.

Information on bipolar disorder including symptoms, causes, diagnosis, treatment options, and resources to find help for yourself or others.

Information about bipolar disorder in children and teens including causes, signs and symptoms, diagnosis, treatment options, and how to help.

This infographic presents common signs and symptoms of bipolar disorder in teens and young adults.

Information about borderline personality disorder, including signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatments for borderline personality disorder.

Information on children’s mental health including behavioral assessments, when to seek help, treatment, and guidance on working with your child’s school.

Learn about what a clinical trial is, potential risks and benefits, safety and ethical guidelines, and what people might experience during a clinical trial.

Information about depression including the different types of depression, signs and symptoms, diagnosis, treatment options, and how to find help.

Information about depression in women including signs and symptoms, types of depression unique to women, treatment options, and how to find help.

Information about disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, including a what it is, signs and symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, and tips for parents and caregivers.

Information about eating disorders including risk factors, types of eating disorders, symptoms, treatment, and how to find help for yourself or someone else.

Information about suicide risk factors, warning signs, treatments, therapies, how to find help for yourself or others, and research about suicide prevention.

Information about generalized anxiety disorder including common signs and symptoms, treatment options, and how to find help.

This printable coloring and activity book for children ages 8-12 has information about mental health research and paths to becoming a mental health researcher.

This free science education activity book helps kids ages 8-12 learn facts about the brain with coloring and puzzles about brain science and research.

Information about telehealth for mental health services, including potential benefits and drawbacks and factors to consider when looking for a provider.

This fact sheet presents information on how children and adolescents respond to traumatic events, and what family, friends, and trusted adults can do to help.

This fact sheet is intended for teens and young adults and presents information about stress, anxiety, and ways to cope when feeling overwhelmed.

A brief social media graphic about stress, anxiety, and ways to cope when feeling overwhelmed.

This infographic presents facts that can help shape conversations around eating disorders.

This fact sheet provides information on how you can look at your family health history and your genes to determine your risk of developing a mental disorder.

Information about assessing your mental health and deciding if you need help. It provides examples of symptoms, self-care activities, and how to seek help.

This booklet provides an overview of NIMH’s 75-year history, charting a timeline of key events and major research programs and public health initiatives.

Information on obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) including signs and symptoms, causes, and treatment options such as psychotherapy and medication.

Information about panic disorder, including common signs and symptoms, treatment options, and how to find help.

Information about causes, symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of Pediatric Acute-onset Neuropsychiatric Syndrome and Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Streptococcal Infections.

This brochure provides information about perinatal depression including signs and symptoms, treatment options, and how you or a loved one can get help.

Information about phobias and phobia-related disorders, including causes and treatments.

Information about post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) including what it is, who develops PTSD, symptoms, treatment options, and how to find help.

This brochure provides information about schizophrenia including symptoms, causes, treatment options, and how to find help for yourself or a loved one.

Information about seasonal affective disorder (SAD), a type of depression, including signs and symptoms, how SAD is diagnosed, causes, and treatment options.

This infographic provides information about how to recognize the symptoms of seasonal affective disorder (SAD) and what to do to get help.

Information about social anxiety disorder, including common signs and symptoms, treatment options, and how to find help.

This free coloring and activity book helps kids learn simple ways to manage stress and boost their mental well-being.

This fact sheet is intended for teens and young adults and presents information about how to recognize the symptoms of depression and how to get help.

Learn about how the teen brain grows, matures, and adapts to the world.

Five tips to help prepare and guide you on how to talk to a health care provider about your mental health and get the most out of your visit.

This fact sheet presents information on psychosis including causes, signs and symptoms, treatment, and resources for help.

Information about the link between depression and chronic disease, including symptoms of depression and resources to find help for yourself or someone else.

This infographic presents behaviors and feelings that may be warning signs that someone is thinking about suicide.

Information about eating disorders, including anorexia nervosa, binge-eating disorder, bulimia nervosa, and avoidant restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID).