TOPIC: Publicaciones acerca trastornos de la salud mental y temas relacionados
TITLE: Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD): More Than the Winter Blues
SOURCE_URL: https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/seasonal-affective-disorder-sad-more-than-the-winter-blues
----------------------------------------

Download PDF

As the days get shorter and there is less daylight, you may start to feel sad. While many people experience the “winter blues,” some people may have a type of depression calledseasonal affective disorder(SAD).

The first step is to determine how much your symptoms interfere with your daily life.

Do you have mild symptoms that have lasted less than 2 weeks?

Feeling down but still able to take care of yourself and others

Having some trouble sleeping

Having less energy than usual but still able to do your job, schoolwork, or housework

These activities can make you feel better

Doing something you enjoy

Going outside in the sunlight

Spending time with family and friends

Eating healthy and avoiding foods with lots of sugar

If these activities do not help or your symptoms are getting worse, talk to a health care provider.

Do you have more severe symptoms that have lasted more than 2 weeks?

Social withdrawal

Oversleeping

Gaining weight

Craving foods with lots of sugar like cakes, candies, and cookies

Seek professional help

Light therapy

Psychotherapy (talk therapy)

Medications

Vitamin D supplements

For help finding treatment, visitNIMH’s Help for Mental Illnesses webpage.

If you or someone you know is in immediate distress or is thinking about hurting themselves, call or text the988 Suicide & Crisis Lifelineat988or chat at988lifeline.org.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICESNational Institutes of HealthNIMH Identification No. OM 22-4320

Share the Infographic on Social Media

Is it just the 'winter blues' or seasonal affective disorder (SAD)? This infographic may help guide you on when to seek professional help.https://go.usa.gov/xeqyS#shareNIMH

Copy post to clipboard

Find moreresources to shareon social media.
