TOPIC: Publications about Prevention
TITLE: 5 Action Steps to Help Someone Having Thoughts of Suicide
SOURCE_URL: https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/5-action-steps-to-help-someone-having-thoughts-of-suicide
----------------------------------------

Download PDF

We can all take steps to help prevent suicide.Knowing thewarning signsfor suicide and how to get help can save lives.

5 Action Steps

Here are 5 steps you can take to #BeThe1To help someone who is having thoughts of suicide:

ASK:“Are you thinking about suicide?” It’s not an easy question to ask, but it can help start a conversation. Studies show thatasking peopleif they are suicidal does not increase suicidal behavior or thoughts.

BE THERE:Listening without judgment is key to learning what the person is thinking and feeling. Research suggestsacknowledging and talking about suicidemay reduce suicidal thoughts.

HELP KEEP THEM SAFE:Reducing access to highly lethal items or places can help prevent suicide. Asking the person if they have a plan and making lethal means less available or less deadly can help the person stay safe when suicidal thoughts arise.

HELP THEM CONNECT:Connecting the person with the988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline(call or text 988)and other community resources can give them a safety net when they need it. You can also help them reach out to a trusted family member, friend, spiritual advisor, or mental health professional.

FOLLOW UP:Staying in touch with the person after they have experienced a crisis or been discharged from care can make a difference. Studies show thatsupportive, ongoing contactcan play an important role in suicide prevention.

Learn more aboutsuicide preventionand the#BeThe1To campaign.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICESNational Institutes of HealthNIMH Identifier No. OM 24-4315Revised 2024

Share the Infographic on Social Media

Disponible en español

If you think someone might be considering suicide, be the one to help them by taking these 5 steps: Ask. Be There. Help Keep Them Safe. Help Them Connect. Follow Up. Learn more at:https://go.nih.gov/zC9dLJf#shareNIMH

Copy post to clipboard

Find moreresources to shareon social media.
